# Research overview

In a city with more than 15 million residents, access to healthcare is becoming increasingly difficult. There are many reasons resulting in different types and degrees of inaccessibility that concern the whole nation such as deficiencies in the health infrastructure mainly denoted by the insufficient amount of specialist doctors and hospital beds compared to OECD averages (İPA, 2023); and concern Istanbul such as the uneven distribution of health facilities among districts and the provision of (quality) services predominantly by private facilities.

In the international literature, healthcare accessibility has been a widely investigated area. In the Turkish literature, on the other hand, this issue has been approached from the perspective of the existence of hospitals in certain areas. The Istanbul Municipality (İstanbul Büyükşehir Belediyesi) has prepared an index to measure the accessibility of health in walking distance on the neighborhood level. However, this research does not have any documentation to examine the data and method(s) used in index construction. So, this research will be a stepping stone and baseline in developing a healthcare accessibility measure on the province level in Istanbul.

Considering the fact that healthcare accessibility has been a critical issue in Istanbul which is a megacity with an ever-growing population, this research aims to conceptualize and operationalize spatial healthcare accessibility to pinpoint possible inequalities in the health infrastructure mainly due to the uneven placement of hospitals and differing travel costs. 

Within the scope of this research, accessibility refers to the fastest drive time to hospitals assuming that people would be more inclined to use vehicles (ambulance, bus, taxi, personal automobile, etc.) and less crowded facilities to receive primary and emergency care from public or private healthcare facilities. The level of accessibility is measured on the province level using the neighborhoods as the location(s) of demand, neighborhood populations as the measure of demand, healthcare facilities as the location(s) of supply, and the number of specialist doctors in each facility as the measure of supply. The Rational Agent Access Model (RAAM) measures spatial healthcare accessibility using the PySAL Package developed by Saxon and colleagues (2020). Quantum GIS (QGIS) is used for visualization and calculating travel time cost matrix. 
